
=head1 NAME

gdnsd-plugin-weighted - gdnsd plugin implementing "weighted" records

=head1 SYNOPSIS

Example plugin config:

  plugins => {
    weighted => {
      multi = false # default
      service_types = none
      up_thresh => 0.5 # default
      corpwww => {
        lb01 = [ lb01.example.com., 99 ]
        lb02 = [ lb02.example.com., 15 ]
        lb03 = [ lb03, 1 ]
      }
      frontwww6 => {
        service_types = up
        multi = true
        wwwhost01 = [ 2001:db8::123, 4 ]
        wwwhost02 = [ 2001:db8::456, 1 ]
        wwwhost03 = [ 2001:db8::789, 2 ]
      }
      pubwww => {
        service_types = [ web_check, foo ]
        up_thresh => 0.01,
        pubhost01 = [ 192.0.2.1, 44 ]
        pubhost02 = [ 192.0.2.2, 11 ]
        pubhost02 = [ 192.0.2.3, 11 ]
        pubhost02 = [ 192.0.2.4, 11 ]
      }
      cdnwww => {
        service_types = web_check
        datacenter1 => {
          d1-lb1 = [ 127.0.0.1, 2 ]
          d1-lb2 = [ 127.0.0.2, 2 ]
        }
        datacenter2 => {
          d2-lb1 = [ 127.0.0.3, 2 ]
          d2-lb2 = [ 127.0.0.4, 2 ]
          d2-lb3 = [ 127.0.0.5, 1 ]
        }
      }
      mixed => {
        multi => false,
        addrs_v4 => {
          lb1 = [ 127.0.0.3, 2 ]
          lb2 = [ 127.0.0.4, 2 ]
        }
        addrs_v6 => {
          multi => true
          www6set1 = {
            lb01 => [ 2001:db8::123, 4 ]
            lb02 => [ 2001:db8::456, 1 ]
          }
          www6set2 = {
            lb01 => [ 2001:db8::789, 4 ]
            lb02 => [ 2001:db8::ABC, 1 ]
          }
        }
      }
      cn => {
        cnames => {
          foo = [ lb01.example.com., 99 ]
          bar = [ lb02.example.com., 15 ]
        }
      }
    }
  }

Zonefile RRs referencing the above:

  www.corp   300 DYNC weighted!corpwww
  www6.front 300 DYNA weighted!frontwww6
  www        300 DYNA weighted!pubwww
  cdn        300 DYNA weighted!cdnwww
  mixed-a    300 DYNA weighted!mixed
  cnames     300 DYNC weighted!cn

=head1 DESCRIPTION

B<gdnsd-plugin-weighted> can be used to return one (or a subset)
of several address records, or one of several CNAME records
based on dynamic-weighted probabilities.

=head1 CONFIGURATION - TOP LEVEL

At the top level, there are three special parameter keys: C<service_types>,
C<up_thresh>, and C<multi>.  These only affect the behavior of address
(C<DYNA>) lookups.  They are ignored for CNAME (C<DYNC>) lookups.  All
of these keys are inherited and override-able at the per-resource and
per-address-family levels.

The top-level default C<service_types> is C<default>, which is a built-in
service type provided by gdnsd.  For more information about
configuring non-default service type's, see the main L<gdnsd.config(5)>
documentation.  The default polls the C</> URL at each IP address
on port 80 for a "200 OK" response every 10 seconds, and has
some anti-flap parameters that stabilize the state against isolated,
intermittent failures.

C<multi> is a boolean that can be C<true> or C<false>, and defaults to
C<false>.  C<multi> controls the behavior of the algorithm
for selecting result addresses, discussed in detail later.

C<up_thresh> defines a floating point fraction of summed address weights
in the range C<(0.0 - 1.0]>, defaulting to C<0.5>, and is used to
influence failure/failover behavior.

Other than those three, the rest of the top level keys are the names of
your resources, and their values are the configuration of each resource.

=head1 CONFIGURATION - PER-RESOURCE

Inside a given resource's configuration hash, again the three
address-related parameters C<services_types>, C<multi>, and C<up_thresh>
may be specified to override their settings per-resource.

There are two basic configuration modes within a resource:

1) Explicit per-family/type sub-stanzas.  In this mode, the resource
contains one or more of the keys C<addrs_v4>, C<addrs_v6>, and C<cnames>.
C<addrs_v4> and/or C<addrs_v6> can both be specified in the same resource,
but C<cnames> cannot co-exist with either of the other two.

The contents of each stanza configure response RRs of the given type for
this resource, and in the addrs_v4/addrs_v6 cases, the 3 behavioral
parameters C<service_types>, C<multi>, and C<up_thresh> can be overridden
per-address-family as well.

2) Automatic top-level detection of just one family/type.  In this mode,
you can configure the top-level of a resource with valid contents for one
of the stanzas C<addrs_v4>, C<addrs_v6>, or C<cnames>, and the family/type
will be autodetected, and be the only type available in this resource.

=head1 CONFIGURATION - CNAMES

When configuring cnames, the value of each item should be
C<[ CNAME, WEIGHT ]>, and the resource will be useful for C<DYNC> zonefile
records, resolving to a weighted CNAME record in responses.  The weighting
decision will return a single CNAME answer, with the probability of each
choice being C<weight / total_weight>.

If the CNAMEs are not fully-qualified (do not end in "."), the current
C<$ORIGIN> value for the zonefile RR being queried will be appended to
complete the name, much as you would expect if the same not-fully-qualified
name were substituted into the zonefiles everywhere the relevant DYNC record
exists.

=head1 CONFIGURATION - ADDRESSES

With the exception that C<addrs_v4> and C<addrs_v6> must contain only
addresses of the correct family (or in the top-level auto-detect case,
the top level entries must all be of the same family), the two stanzas
behave identically.  When both are present, they are both used in every
C<DYNA> response (as gdnsd always includes opposite-family records in
the Additional section of A/AAAA queries).

Within either address family type, there are two different binary
dimensions (multi -> true/false, and grouped-vs-ungrouped) upon which the
configuration and behavior hinge, leading to four different possible cases:
ungrouped-single, ungrouped-multi, grouped-single, and grouped-multi.  Each
will be discussed in detail below:

=head1 THE UNGROUPED SINGLE CASE

This is the simplest case.  The code detects this case when it sees that
C<multi> is false (the default), and that the values of the keys are arrays
rather than sub-hashes.  Each hash key is an address label, and each value
is an array of C<[ IPADDR, WEIGHT ]>.

When answering a query in this case, first the weights are converted to
dynamic weights.  The dynamic weight of an address is its configured weight
if the monitored state is C<UP> or C<DANGER>, or zero if the monitored
state is C<DOWN>.  The dynamic weights are summed to produce a dynamic
weight total, and then a single address to respond with is chosen from the
set, with each address having the odds C<addr_dynamic_weight /
total_dynamic_weight>.

However, if the C<total_dynamic_weight> is less than C<ceil(up_thresh *
total_configured_weight)>, then the dynamic weights are all reset to their
configured full values so that the response odds are the same as if all
were C<UP>, and resource-level failure is signalled to any upper-layer
meta-plugin (e.g. metafo or geoip) when applicable.

Example (X could be a whole resource, or an addrs_v4 stanza):

  X => {
    multi => false # default
    # odds below assume no addresses are down:
    lb01 => [ 192.0.2.1, 45 ] # 25% chance (45/180)
    lb02 => [ 192.0.2.1, 60 ] # 33% chance (60/180)
    lb03 => [ 192.0.2.1, 75 ] # 42% chance (75/180)
  }

=head1 THE UNGROUPED MULTI CASE

This case is detected when, (as above) the values of the keys are arrays
of C<[ IPADDR, WEIGHT]>, but the parameter C<multi> is true.  The change
from the above behavior is primarily that multiple addresses from the
weighted set can be returned in each response.  The C<maximum>, rather
than the sum, of the dynamic weights (again, zero for down addresses,
configured-weight otherwise), is found, and the odds of each address's
inclusion in the response set is
C<addr_dyanmic_weight / max_dynamic_weight>.

This means all non-C<DOWN> addresses which share the group's maximum
dynamic weight value will always be included, whereas others will be
optionally included depending on the odds.  At least one address is always
returned (because logically, at least one address has the maximum weight,
giving it a 100% chance), and sometimes the full non-C<DOWN> set will be
returned.

C<up_thresh> behaves as in the previous case: If the sum of the dynamic
weight values is less than C<ceil(up_thresh * total_configured_weight)>,
then the dynamic weights are all set to their configured values and the
result set is calculated as if all were C<UP>, while signalling
resource-level failure to upstream meta-plugins (geoip or metafo).

Example:

  X => {
    multi => true
    # odds below assume no addresses are down:
    lb01 => [ 192.0.2.1, 45 ] # 75% chance (45/60)
    lb02 => [ 192.0.2.1, 60 ] # 100% chance (60/60)
    lb03 => [ 192.0.2.1, 60 ] # 100% chance (60/60)
    # overall possible result-sets:
    # lb01,lb02,lb03 -> 75%
    # lb02,lb03 -> 25%
  }

=head1 THE GROUPED SINGLE CASE

The grouped cases are detected when the keys' values are sub-hashes at
the outer level rather than arrays of C<[ IPADDR, WEIGHT]>.  In the grouped
case, first the set is divided into named groups, and then within each group
individual addresses are configured as
C<addrlabel =E<gt> [ IPADDR, WEIGHT ]>.

Example:

   X => {
     group1 => {
       lb01 => [ 192.0.2.1, 10 ]
       lb02 => [ 192.0.2.1, 20 ]
       lb03 => [ 192.0.2.1, 30 ]
     }
     group2 => {
       lb01 => [ 192.0.2.7, 10 ]
       lb02 => [ 192.0.2.8, 20 ]
       lb03 => [ 192.0.2.9, 30 ]
     }
   }

The grouped single case, of course, occurs when the configuration layout
is as shown above, and the C<multi> parameter is C<false> (the default).

In grouped-single mode, essentially the groups are weighted against each
other similarly to the single case for ungrouped addresses, resulting in
the choice of a single group from the set of groups. Then the
addresses within the chosen group are weighted against each other in
multi-style, returning potentially more than one address from the chosen
group.

Specifically, each group's odds of being the single group chosen is
C<group_dyn_weight / total_dyn_weight>, where the group's dynamic weight
is the sum of the dynamic weights within it (C<DOWN> addresses are zero),
and the total dynamic weight is the dynamic sum of all groups.  Then
within each group, the odds of each address being included in the
multi-response set is C<addr_dyn_weight / group_max_dyn_weight>.

C<up_thresh> operates on all groups as a whole, and if the non-C<DOWN>
sum of all weights in all groups fails to meet the standard
of C<ceil(up_thresh * total_sum_configured_weight)>, then all addresses
will be treated as if they are C<UP> for selection purposes, and
resource-level failure will be signalled upstream.

=head1 THE GROUPED MULTI CASE

You can probably infer this one's behavior from reading about the
previous three cases.  The difference from the previous grouped-single
case is that the multi-vs-single behaviors are reversed.  Multiple
groups are chosen based on the dynamic maximum weight between the
groups, and a single weighted address is returned from the subset
within each chosen group.  All of the details above logically apply
in the way you would expect, as all of these four cases internally share
the same code and logic, they just apply different bits of it to
different subsets of the problem.

=head1 GENERAL NOTES ON ADDRESS MODE CASES ABOVE

Note that any time multi-selection is in effect at a layer
(the top layer when multi is true, or within a group when
when multi is false), the minimum count of chosen items will
be the count of items that share the maximum weight within the set.
e.g. a set of items with weights C<30, 30, 30, 20, 20> will always
choose at least 3/5 items (because the first three have 100%
odds of inclusion), and the total response set will range
as high as all 5 items with some probability.

A practical use-case example for grouped-single:

Splitting groups on subnet boundaries in grouped-single mode
gives the result that a single response packet never mixes subnets.
This would enable your DNS-based balancing to defeat certain forms
of client-level Destination Address Selection interference, while
still returning multiple addresses per response (all from one
subnet).

A practical use-case for grouped-multi:

Suppose you have a large set of addresses which can be logically grouped
into subsets that have some shared failure risk (e.g. subpartitions of a
datacenter which share infrastructure).  With grouped-multi behavior,
clients will get up to N (count of groups) addresses in a round-robin
response, but a given response set will never contain two addresses from
the same group/subset.  This maximizes the chance that the client can
successfully fail over to another address in the list when its primary
selection fails, since the total set in each response does not share any
per-subset failure mode.

=head1 LIMITS

All weights must be positive integer values greater than zero and
less than 2^20 (1048576).

There is a limit of 64 addresses, address-groups, or cnames at the
top level of a resource (or per address family in the addrs_v4/addrs_v6
cases), and a limit of 64 addresses within each address group in
the grouped modes.

=head1 SEE ALSO

L<gdnsd.config(5)>, L<gdnsd.zonefile(5)>, L<gdnsd(8)>

The gdnsd manual.

=head1 COPYRIGHT AND LICENSE

Copyright (c) 2012 Anton Tolchanov <me@knyar.net>,
Brandon L Black <blblack@gmail.com> and Jay Reitz <jreitz@gmail.com>

This file is part of gdnsd-plugin-weighted.

gdnsd-plugin-weighted is free software: you can redistribute it and/or
modify
it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by
the Free Software Foundation, either version 3 of the License, or
(at your option) any later version.

gdnsd-plugin-weighted is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
GNU General Public License for more details.

You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License
along with gdnsd-plugin-weighted.  If not, see
<http://www.gnu.org/licenses/>.

=cut
