
=head1 NAME

gdnsd-plugin-http_status - gdnsd HTTP monitoring plugin

=head1 SYNOPSIS

Example http_status service_types config:

  service_types => {
    webcheck => {
      plugin => http_status,
      port => 8080,             # default 80
      url_path => /checkme      # default '/'
      vhost => www.example.com  # default none
      ok_codes => [ 200, 301 ], # default [ 200 ]
      up_thresh => 20,
      ok_thresh => 10,
      down_thresh => 10,
      interval => 10,
      timeout => 3,
    }
  }

=head1 DESCRIPTION

B<gdnsd-plugin-http_status> is a monitoring plugin that
checks basic HTTP service.

=head1 PARAMETERS

=over 4

=item port

The numeric port number to connect on, default C<80>.

=item url_path

The string URL to GET from the remote service, default C</>

=item vhost

The string hostname to supply as a C<Host:> header with the
request.  No default.  If unspecified, no C<Host:> header is
sent at all.

=item ok_codes

An array of integer HTTP status codes which are acceptable
as positive responses.  The default is C<[ 200 ]>.

=back

=head1 SEE ALSO

L<gdnsd.config(5)>, L<gdnsd.zonefile(5)>, L<gdnsd(8)>

The gdnsd manual.

=head1 COPYRIGHT AND LICENSE

Copyright (c) 2014 Brandon L Black <blblack@gmail.com>

This file is part of gdnsd.

gdnsd is free software: you can redistribute it and/or
modify it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by
the Free Software Foundation, either version 3 of the License, or
(at your option) any later version.

gdnsd is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
GNU General Public License for more details.

You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License
along with gdnsd.  If not, see
<http://www.gnu.org/licenses/>.

=cut
