
=head1 NAME

gdnsd_geoip_test - Commandline test program for gdnsd-plugin-geoip maps

=head1 SYNOPSIS

  gdnsd_geoip_test [-c @GDNSD_DEFPATH_CONFIG@] [map_name addr]
    -c            gdnsd config dir, see main gdnsd(8) manpage for details
    map_name      Mapping name from geoip plugin config
    addr          Client IP address to map.

=head1 DESCRIPTION

This is a simple commandline test program for C<gdnsd-plugin-geoip> map
configurations.  It parses your standard gdnsd config file, extracts the
relevant bits from the geoip plugin section, and processes the C<maps>
section using the same core code as the plugin itself.  It then resolves
the supplied IP address against the supplied map name, providing an
ordered datacenter list (and edns scope netmask) result.

The input IP addresses on the commandline do not accept CIDR subnet
information.  This is intentional.  Because of the method by which
C<gdnsd-plugin-geoip> builds, optimizes, and performs lookups on the
internal data, the client subnet mask is irrelevant, and the response
scope mask is always as specific or general as necessary.  To simulate
different edns input masks on the same address data, simply zero out
more of the right hand bits of the address.

If no C<[map_name addr]> is given on the commandline, the program
enters a REPL (Read-Eval-Print Loop) mode with a prompt, allowing
you to interactively enter several C<[map_name addr]> pairs without
reloading the configured database(s).

=head1 SEE ALSO

L<gdnsd-plugin-geoip(8)>, L<gdnsd.config(5)>, L<gdnsd(8)>

The gdnsd manual.

=head1 COPYRIGHT AND LICENSE

Copyright (c) 2012 Brandon L Black <blblack@gmail.com>

This file is part of gdnsd.

gdnsd-plugin-geoip is free software: you can redistribute it and/or modify
it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by
the Free Software Foundation, either version 3 of the License, or
(at your option) any later version.

gdnsd-plugin-geoip is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
GNU General Public License for more details.

You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License
along with gdnsd-plugin-geoip.  If not, see <http://www.gnu.org/licenses/>.

=cut
