
=head1 NAME

gdnsd-plugin-null - gdnsd null plugin

=head1 SYNOPSIS

Example null service_types config:

  service_types => {
    my_null_mon => {
      plugin => null,
      # ... other generic service_type params
    }
  }

Zonefile RRs using null resolution

  foo 300 DYNA null
  bar 300 DYNC null!whatever

=head1 DESCRIPTION

B<gdnsd-plugin-null> exists mostly as an example of the minimum
possible plugin of both types.  It is simultaneously both a
monitoring plugin and a resolution plugin.

When used as a resolution plugin in C<DNYA> or C<DYNC> RRs, it
ignores any resource name provided.  With C<DYNA> it always
returns the IPv4 address C<0.0.0.0> and the IPv6 address C<::>.
With C<DYNC> it always returns a CNAME to to the domainname
C<invalid.>

When used as a monitoring plugin by defining a service_type as
shown in the example above it emulates the behavior of a real
monitoring plugin (updating at correct intervals, etc) but
sends a C<DOWN> result at every monitoring check interval without
actually checking anything.

=head1 SEE ALSO

L<gdnsd.config(5)>, L<gdnsd.zonefile(5)>, L<gdnsd(8)>

The gdnsd manual.

=head1 COPYRIGHT AND LICENSE

Copyright (c) 2014 Brandon L Black <blblack@gmail.com>

This file is part of gdnsd.

gdnsd is free software: you can redistribute it and/or
modify it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by
the Free Software Foundation, either version 3 of the License, or
(at your option) any later version.

gdnsd is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
GNU General Public License for more details.

You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License
along with gdnsd.  If not, see
<http://www.gnu.org/licenses/>.

=cut
